Earth! thou mother of numberless children, the nurse and the
    mother,
Hail! O Goddess, thrice hail! Blest be thou! and, blessing, I hymn
    thee!
Forth, ye sweet sounds! from my harp, and my voice shall float on
    your surges--
Soar thou aloft, O my soul! and bear up my song on thy pinions.

Travelling the vale with mine eyes--green meadows and lake with
    green island,
Dark in its basin of rock, and the bare stream flowing in
    brightness,
Thrilled with thy beauty and love in the wooded slope of the
    mountain,
Here, great mother, I lie, thy child, with his head on thy bosom!
Playful the spirits of noon, that rushing soft through thy tresses,
Green-haired goddess! refresh me; and hark! as they hurry or
    linger,
Fill the pause of my harp, or sustain it with musical murmurs.
Into my being thou murmurest joy, and tenderest sadness
Shedd'st thou, like dew, on my heart, till the joy and the
    heavenly sadness
Pour themselves forth from my heart in tears, and the hymn of
    thanksgiving.

Earth! thou mother of numberless children, the nurse and the
    mother,
Sister thou of the stars, and beloved by the Sun, the rejoicer!
Guardian and friend of the moon, O Earth, whom the comets forget
    not,
Yea, in the measureless distance wheel round and again they behold
    thee!
Fadeless and young (and what if the latest birth of creation?)
Bride and consort of Heaven, that looks down upon thee enamoured!
Say, mysterious Earth! O say, great mother and goddess,
Was it not well with thee then, when first thy lap was ungirdled,
Thy lap to the genial Heaven, the day that he wooed thee and won
    thee!
Fair was thy blush, the fairest and first of the blushes of
    morning!
Deep was the shudder, O Earth! the throe of thy self-retention:
Inly thou strovest to flee, and didst seek thyself at thy centre!
Mightier far was the joy of thy sudden resilience; and forthwith
Myriad myriads of lives teemed forth from the mighty embracement.
Thousand-fold tribes of dwellers, impelled by thousand-fold
    instincts,
Filled, as a dream, the wide waters; the rivers sang on their
    channels;
Laughed on their shores the hoarse seas; the yearning ocean
    swelled upward;
Young life lowed through the meadows, the woods, and the echoing
    mountains,
Wandered bleating in valleys, and warbled on blossoming branches.
