Almost awake? Why, what is this, and whence,
  O ye right loyal men, all undefiléd?
Sure, 'tis not possible that Common-Sense
  Has hitch'd her pullies to each heavy eye-lid?

Yet wherefore else that start, which discomposes
  The drowsy waters lingering in your eye?
  And are you _really_ able to descry
That precipice three yards beyond your noses?

Yet flatter you I cannot, that your wit
  Is much improved by this long loyal dozing;
And I admire, no more than Mr. Pitt,
  Your jumps and starts of patriotic prosing--

Now cluttering to the Treasury Cluck, like chicken,
  Now with small beaks the ravenous _Bill_ opposing;
With serpent-tongue now stinging, and now licking,
  Now semi-sibilant, now smoothly glozing--

Now having faith implicit that he can't err,
  Hoping his hopes, alarm'd with his alarms;
And now believing him a sly inchanter,
  Yet still afraid to break his brittle charms,

Lest some mad Devil suddenly unhamp'ring,
  Slap-dash! the imp should fly off with the steeple,
On revolutionary broom-stick scampering.--
  O ye soft-headed and soft-hearted people,

If you can stay so long from slumber free,
  My muse shall make an effort to salute 'e:
For lo! a very dainty simile
  Flash'd sudden through my brain, and 'twill just suit 'e!

You know that water-fowl that cries, Quack! Quack!?
  Full often have I seen a waggish crew
Fasten the Bird of Wisdom on its back,
  The ivy-haunting bird, that cries, Tu-whoo!

Both plung'd together in the deep mill-stream,
  (Mill-stream, or farm-yard pond, or mountain-lake,)
Shrill, as a _Church and Constitution_ scream,
  Tu-whoo! quoth Broad-face, and down dives the Drake!

The green-neck'd Drake once more pops up to view,
  Stares round, cries Quack! and makes an angry pother;
Then shriller screams the Bird with eye-lids blue,
  The broad-faced Bird! and deeper dives the other.
Ye _quacking_ Statesmen! 'tis even so with you--
  One Peasecod is not liker to another.

Even so on Loyalty's Decoy-pond, each
  Pops up his head, as fir'd with British blood,
Hears once again the Ministerial screech,
  And once more seeks the bottom's blackest mud!

1798.
                                     (_Signed:_ LABERIUS.)
