actually was zealous and frequent in defending and praising his public
principles of conduct in the _Morning Post_--and all this in the
presence of men of Rank previously disposed to think highly . . . I am
sure you will not be surprised that _this_ did provoke me, and that it
justifies to my heart the detail here printed.

                                                 S. T. COLERIDGE.

P.S.--I never spoke severely of R. B. S. but once and then I confess, I
_did_ say that Sheridan was Sheridan. _MS. R_.

 The fourth act of the play in its original shape, and,
presumably, as sent to Sheridan, opened with the following lines:--

  'Drip! drip! drip! drip!--in such a place as this
   It has nothing else to do but drip! drip! drip!
   I wish it had not dripp'd upon my torch.'

In _MS. III_ the opening lines are erased and the fourth Act opens
thus:--

  This ceaseless dreary sound of { [*water-drops*]
                                 { dropping water
  I would they had not fallen upon my Torch!

After the lapse of sixteen years Coleridge may have confused the
corrected version with the original. There is no MS. authority for the
line as quoted in the Preface.

 'This circumstance.' Second edition.

 The caste was as follows:--_Marquis Valdez_, Mr. Pope; _Don
Alvar_, Mr. Elliston; _Don Ordonio_, Mr. Rae; _Monviedro_, Mr. Powell;
_Zulimez_, Mr. Crooke; _Isidore_, Mr. De Camp; _Naomi_, Mr. Wallack;
_Donna Teresa_, Miss Smith; _Alhadra_, Mrs. Glover.

 Mrs. G.'s eldest child was buried on the Thursday--two others
were ill, and one, with croup given over (tho' it has since recovered)
and spite of her's, the physician's and my most passionate
remonstrances, she was forced to act Alhadra on the Saturday!!!

Mrs. Glover (I do not much like her, in some respects) was duped into a
marriage with a worthless Sharper, who passed himself off on her as a
man of rank and fortune and who now lives and feeds himself and his
vices on her salary--and hence all her affections flow in the channel of
her maternal feelings. She is a passionately fond mother, and to act
Alhadra on the Saturday after the Thursday's Burial! _MS. H_. (For _MS.
H_ _see_ p. 819.)

 Poor Rae! a good man as Friend, Husband, Father. He did his
best! but his person is so insignificant, tho' a handsome man off the
stage--and, worse than that, the thinness and an insufficiency of his
voice--yet Ordonio has done him service. _MS. H_.

PROLOGUE

BY C. LAMB

_Spoken by_ Mr. _CARR_

  There are, I am told, who sharply criticise
  Our modern theatres' unwieldy size.
  We players shall scarce plead guilty to that charge,
  Who think a house can never be too large:
  Griev'd when a rant, that's worth a nation's ear,
  Shakes some prescrib'd Lyceum's petty sphere;
  And pleased to mark the grin from space to space
  Spread epidemic o'er a town's broad face.--
  O might old Betterton or Booth return
  To view our structures from their silent urn,
  Could Quin come stalking from Elysian glades,
  Or Garrick get a day-rule from the shades--
  Where now, perhaps, in mirth which Spirits approve,
  He imitates the ways of men above,
  And apes the actions of our upper coast,
  As in his days of flesh he play'd the ghost:--
  How might they bless our ampler scope to please,
  And hate their own old shrunk up audiences.--
  Their houses yet were palaces to those,
  Which Ben and Fletcher for their triumphs chose,
  Shakspeare, who wish'd a kingdom for a stage,
  Like giant pent in disproportion'd cage,
  Mourn'd his contracted strengths and crippled rage.
  He who could tame his vast ambition down
  To please some scatter'd gleanings of a town,
  And, if some hundred auditors supplied
  Their meagre meed of claps, was satisfied,
  How had he felt, when that dread curse of Lear's
  Had burst tremendous on a thousand ears,
  While deep-struck wonder from applauding bands
  Return'd the tribute of as many hands!
  Rude were his guests; he never made his bow
  To such an audience as salutes us now.
  He lack'd the balm of labour, female praise.
  Few Ladies in his time frequented plays,
  Or came to see a youth with awkward art
  And shrill sharp pipe burlesque the woman's part.
  The very use, since so essential grown,
  Of painted scenes, was to his stage unknown.
  The air-blest castle, round whose wholesome crest,
  The martlet, guest of summer, chose her nest--
  The forest walks of Arden's fair domain,
  Where Jaques fed his solitary vein--
  No pencil's aid as yet had dared supply,
  Seen only by the intellectual eye.
  Those scenic helps, denied to Shakspeare's page,
  Our Author owes to a more liberal age.
  Nor pomp nor circumstance are wanting here;
  'Tis for himself alone that he must fear.
  Yet shall remembrance cherish the just pride,
  That (be the laurel granted or denied)
  He first essay'd in this distinguished fane,
  Severer muses and a tragic strain.
